February 14, Valentine's Day, sitting in the
basement of the Weissenbaker building, getting
ready to interview Charlie Holland, who got here a
little more than 50 years ago. Charlie, test your
mic. Testing one, two. Is it all right? For
someone who may not have known you in a few years to
come when they're looking at this material or
listening to it, would you begin by summarizing
your background and experience, where you grew
up, went to school, your experience before you got
to Texas A&M? Well, I grew up in western North
Carolina, and my dad was a Baptist minister. In
fact, I started the first grade the year he
finished Wake Forest. He had been in World War I,
and he decided to go down and finish up. So we moved
to Wake Forest, and about Christmas time, the
twins were born, and he took me out. He took me out of
the first grade, because he was afraid I might
bring home some childhood diseases. And then the
next year after that, we moved to Mountain View,
and I was just recently at Christmas going up there
looking for the place that we moved to. It was on a
dirt road out from North Wilkesboro, and this will
kind of give you the view of what things were like in
those times. And he was pastor of a little Baptist
church. There was a Baptist junior college high
school, and he taught the mathematics there. And
this was back in time that the Depression was
coming on us out there. And all he got out of that
year's teaching at that little junior college was
an Underwood typewriter, which I have at home.
That was all they could pay. And I went to school. It
was a little one-room schoolhouse. First grade in
the first row, second grade in the second.
Pot-bellied stove. Down at the bottom on old slick
red hill was an outhouse. And all the kids went to
the outhouse. And also the water was simply a
barrel, just like you'd see a keg of beer. And so Dad
said, when we went there, I better put you back in
the first grade, because I'm afraid I don't want
you to get behind. So I started out in the first.
Well, in that school, you could get promoted. All
you had to do was just show you could do the second
grade work. So before that... The year was over. I
was over in the second grade, second row. They'd
moved me to the second. So you just changed seats.
You didn't know... No paperwork. Before the end of
the year, I was in the third row. Well, then we moved
to Stony Point, which is about 60 miles from
Charlotte. And it's still very primitive in those
days, but it did have a consolidated school. They
bused all the kids from the county into that
school. So Dad said, well, I know you were in the
third. You were in the third grade there, but I
think I'll put you back and let you do the second
over. I don't want you to get behind. Well, they put
me in that second grade, and I stayed the whole
year, because they didn't know how to get me out of
it, even though I knew it. Well, right after
Christmas, we went back there and was looking for
this. We wanted to go to all the places that we'd
lived. And so we went to North Wilkesboro, and
there was a bypass, and we stopped at a McDonald's.
And this Mountain View wasn't even on the map yet.
And so we went there to stop at a McDonald's. And I
saw a well-dressed lady over there. And I went over
and struck up a conversation with her. And I asked
her if she knew where Mountain View was. She said,
oh, it's just right up here. You turn off, right up
the road here. Now, let me point out that in those
years, Wilkes County was noted to be the biggest
white lightning county in the United States. And
so she said, yes. I said, I went to school there,
one-room schoolhouse, outhouse down the bottom.
I went to school in the middle of the mountain hill.
And so then I went on back and sat down. And she came
back over afterwards, and she told my daughter, or
my sister, that her husband had passed away. And
she says, well, what did he do? She says, oh, he was a
bootlegger. That was the only way to make a living
in those years. She said, well, didn't the law get
after him? She said, oh, yes, he built time five
different times. So this was kind of the, you know,
the area that I grew up in. And my dad and I, he was
always gone a lot and so forth. And we just didn't
have these father-to-son talks that you always
have nowadays or hear of, like Andy Hardy and Judge
Stone. The closest we ever came to it was the day we
were packing the car. He's getting ready to take me
off to this little Baptist Junior College, Mars
Hill, out from Nashville, North Carolina. And it
was always assumed that I'd go to college. It was
never even, we just didn't discuss it. And I
delivered papers there, and I knew all the
professional people in town. And they said,
you've got, there's a lot of emphasis there on you
need to, you need to go to college and make
something yourself. You heard that over and over
again. And so as we were packing the car, Dad said to
me, he says, son, what are you going to study when
you get up there? I said, well, Dad, I thought I'd
study dentistry. He said, no, son, I don't think
I'd do that if I were you. I don't believe you'll
ever be able to keep up with your tools. Well, see,
I'd lost his saw and hammer so many times that he was
just, and he said, why don't you just go ahead and
study engineering? Well, that's what I did. And so
after the pre-engineering course up there, Mars
Hill, I went to North Carolina State. And my junior
year, I was having breakfast, and that's when
Pearl Harbor hit. Actually, the day we were
packing the car, the Germans marched in Europe,
which marked the beginning, which is the day I
started to college. And then when I was in my junior
year at North Carolina State, the Germans, the
Pearl Harbor occurred. So I went down, and I didn't
want to get drafted. I wanted to finish school. So
what I did was they had a program there where you
could become, get a direct commission, even
though you hadn't been in ROTC. They had an ROTC
there, and people marched around all the time. And
they told me I didn't need one point in taking. I
didn't need one point in it, because I could only do
two years of it. So I didn't take it. But I went down
and got a direct commission to go in the Navy. And so
as soon as I finished college, I had to go in the
Navy. And I was in the Navy and on destroyers for
about, just nearly four years was the tour date.
And the roughest duty that we had was on Okinawa. We
went up there with nine destroyers in the
squadron. And this is where the kamikazes. And for
about two or three months, we were exposed to
kamikazes every single day. And we lost six out of
our nine destroyers. There were only three of us
that made it back. And it was just a matter of luck.
We weren't that much better. And we just, when
they'd hit one station, we'd be on another one. Or
the plane that was coming in at you, we got it shot
down. Well, then after the war, I thought about
going to Georgia Tech, but it turned out that there
was no housing down there. So I decided I'd work for
Burlington Mills. And they had put me into a little
program that was supposed to be training the plant
managers of the future. Well, it turned out that it
looked like I was going to have to work on the third
shift for about 10 years, 15. So I decided I'd just
go back to graduate school. I went back to North
Carolina State. And Dr. Lindsey had taught down
there. And so they gave me his name. I called him and
came, got in touch with him. And so we came out here.
And I began studying the graduate program. In
chemical engineering in January of 1948. That's
it. You came to Texas A&M? Texas A&M in January of
1948. And I promised my wife, because we'd been out
here when I was on the destroyer, I promised her
we'd never stay in Texas. As soon as I got my degree,
we were leaving. Well, we stayed. Still here.
Describe what Texas A&M was physically. Okay.
I'll give you the whole picture. I have some. A guy
named Proctor was one of the first heads of the
extension service, as I understand. And he was my
brother-in-law's
mother's father. He used to be over here in this
same place of research. He used to have a picture
over there. So we visited with the Lees on the way.
And Mr. Lee had been taught. He'd been a high school
principal. He'd gone to the old school and studied
the Latin. He was a classical-type individual.
And he said, so he called up Bolton. Bolton was the
executive vice president. He said, get him a room,
a place to stay up there. So after I'd already come
here and gotten settled, I was over in Lindsey's
office one day, and Mr. Bolton called up and he said
he wanted to see me. Boy, they were just shaking
over there. I went over. So he told me. But the
amusing thing is, he ended up saying, well, just go
over here. Oh, I'd forgotten. Boyette, go see him.
He's in charge of housing. And that was what I got
out of him. About a month or so, we were down there
visiting with Mr. Lee again. He said, well, I
suppose you know Bolton well by now. I said, I'm
sorry, Mr. Lee. Our paths haven't crossed any
since that one time I met him. But Dr. Lindsey was
head of the chemical engineering department. We
were over there in the old petroleum building. At
that time, Barlow was dean of engineering. And
Saul Wright was head of civil. Charlie Crawford
was head of mechanical. Let's
see. Shepard was dean of agriculture. Petroleum?
No, petroleum. Harold Vance was head of
petroleum. And Shepard was head of agriculture.
And I don't remember. I remember Mr. Porter. Mr.
Porter was head of the math department. But I don't
know, don't remember now who was the science dean.
I think Pearson was dean of the graduate college,
followed later by Trotter. But Pearson, I
believe, was the dean when I came here. I worked
most of the time, dealt with Trotter's group over
there. And I think that's, let's see, Street was
teaching drawing. And I can't remember the fellow
that was head of aero. And that's about the one.
There were no sidewalks. It was all, actually, it
was the same way it was in 1943. They had done
nothing during the war. And what, I came in, we had
already gotten over the flood here, but there's
still a lot of veterans. And I would say that that
was the toughest group to compete with I ever ran
against because all they want to know is what's
required, and we'll do it. Because you and your
other veteran buddies, you were mentally,
emotionally mature? Yes. And you were ready to go
to work? Ready to go to work. You'd had experience?
Mm-hmm. And also, you could separate. I had a
family, too. Yeah. Everything was riding on it.
What was your graduate student stipend or
assistantship or what? Oh, it was probably about
$100 a month. Right. And plus the GI Bill. I'm not
even sure we got $100. Maybe we did. I don't
remember what it was. But it was, living in College
View, we could make it. But, see, by the time I got
ready to finish, I ran out of there. Oh. I ran out of
the, I took a job teaching. I ran out of the GI Bill.
So I had to take a job teaching. And then I had to buy a
house over in College Hills. And I bought one on
Harrington Street over there. It cost $13,700.
And that was the poorest year that I've ever
experienced in my life. My salary was $370 a month.
But Lindsay had to get special dispensation to get
me $370. And so that's kind of what it was like here
then. Now, when did you switch officially in
paperwork from being a graduate student to being a
faculty member? About 52. Okay. So you're, all
right, we're still talking about the graduate
student days. Yeah. Well, I finished, I got my PhD
in 53. Oh, okay. But I'd already, I took a job as
instructor in 52, I think it was. And then I believe
in, I guess in 53, that fall I went ahead, I've
forgotten whether I got promoted to assistant
professor. Maybe I went a year before I got made
assistant professor. Looking back now with the
clear vision of hindsight, what courses and what
teachers, instructors were the most important
courses to you? Well, actually, we had some things
back then and there that are better than they are
now. And that is that we took courses outside the
department, a lot of them. And I took mathematics,
I had Luther, and I had Bayes. And then Dr. Klippel
and I, years later, we worked on, I'd just go over
with him and spend an hour a day, every once in a
while, every week we'd have a meeting and prove
theorems and so on. And chemistry, Jensen. And Dr.
Watson. I worked under Murdock, Phil Murdock, in
chemical engineering, but Watson was one of them.
Another one that I took course over there was POTS,
organic chemistry. And Kenny Hancock was another
one that I took a course under. I also took a physics
course, and Dr. Weeks taught it. And then after I
finished my coursework, I went back and took
another course in kinetic theory under Dr.
Silvey, who goes way back. And old Dr. Silvey, the
first day, there were three of us in there,
registered for his course. And he, two physics
students and me. And he said, he said, Mr. Tarlin,
would you like to participate in the classroom
discussion? And I said, well, I believe I'd like to
do that. Well, what that amounted to, we were
presenting one-third of that course for audit.
And then I also had there one under Dr. Klippel, and
I also had there one under Dr. Weeks over there. He
was the first one. I took x-rays and
crystallography, and I never had vectors. And he
just, he had the course full of it, but I learned it,
picked it up from him. And I had to compete against
two graduate physics students in there, or three.
And so Jensen was an outstanding chemistry
teacher. Watson was an outstanding chemistry
teacher. In fact, all of those people, he was never
a real outstanding teacher. He had a tremendous
amount of knowledge. But he could never finish one
sentence until he started another one. Now, what
was his first name? Because I remember Dr. Potts in
agriculture. No, this was a different Potts. I
don't remember what his first name is. You just
have to look it up. What department? Chemistry. In
the chemistry department. He was the organic prof
in chemistry. Kenny Hancock taught a good course
in chemistry. All right, what about within
chemical engineering? Who were the key? Phil
Murdock, I took a course under him. And
let's see, you know, I may have taken most all the
courses I took under him. I took one under G.L.
Fair. He taught process control, and I took that.
But we took, in those years, we were really taking,
see, we didn't teach our own mathematics in our
department. And now all these people trying to
teach everything in one department, they never
see the light of day outside the walls of their
department. Did anybody, do you remember any
advice that somebody gave you which later proved
to be very valuable advice to a chemical engineer?
Oh, I don't know. I just kind of stumbled along, I
guess. I very nearly quit shortly after, about
1955, because I went down to Exxon and worked one
summer. And they wanted me to stay with Exxon. And
at that time, I was making $5,000 a year, Dr. Harris
was making $5,100 a year, and Dr. Lindsey was
making $5,200 a year. And I was an assistant
professor, and both of them were full. And I
figured, well, why should I stay here when that's
all I've got, that's all the future I've got? So it
was, Shirley Lynch, incidentally, in that old
building was head of geology over there. And
that... What persuaded you to stay? Well, I just
got to thinking about it that I don't know.
What had happened was I had to hurry up and get
through because that one year, Phil Murdock left
and Watson left and all my committee left, so I
really pushed that to get it completed. And I
wasn't really sure whether I wanted to stay, I
guess, in that corporate structure. You don't
have near as much freedom as you do in the industry.
What was your dissertation topic in your area of
specialization? I'd done my master's on
distillation, and this one was on catalytic,
study of catalysts. And so on my committee, I had
Dr. Potts from biology, or Potter, Potter from
biology, and Dr. Weeks, and Dr. Watson, and Phil
Murdock, were the ones on it. And I couldn't get it
arranged for the final meeting, and I went by
Watson's house one afternoon late, and he was
sitting back in the backyard with his shirt off
drinking beer. And I told him, I don't know if I'm
going to be able to graduate this time because I
can't get this committee together. Jordan said,
Oh, I can take care of that for you. And he went in and
called them up, and we met over in the old
patrolling building that night. He set it up and we
all met over there, and he said, Do you remember any
special questions on that final oral exam? I don't
remember. I just remember that they asked me some
question, and I guess when you're working on some
of those things you've got so many details in your
mind and it's some little simple something you
won't see. And they asked me that, and then they
found the weakness. And so they just, I don't
remember what it was, but then they just, I think it
was, I think they just wanted to know what the
problem was with the other, you know. And that part
I remember. If you know it, let's go on to the next,
you know, but if you ever find something that you
didn't know. As you thought about it then and now
look back, how did our chemical engineering
department, how did our strength compare
nationally in the mid-50s? Well, we got down
because the salaries were so poor that at one time
we were down to just Dr. Harris, Dr. Lindsey, and I.
And we had to get some graduate students to help us
out. So it was all we could do to even keep the doors
open. You're saying three faculty? We got down to
three faculty. Everybody quit because salaries,
they went to industry or somewhere because
salaries were so poor back in those days. And
that's about when I was about ready to throw in the
towel. But then where the real change come was when
John Connolly got in there. Salaries went up, ours
went up 30% a year. For three or four years there.
But now let's back up. John Calhoun came here as
dean in the 50s, didn't he? Marlow was dean when I
came here. And then John Calhoun came next. Do you
remember any early impressions of Calhoun as the
dean? I just remember that he was much more
energetic than well, Marlow was energetic enough
except that I thought Calhoun was a much better
individual than Marlow was. Did Calhoun did he
come over and visit? Did he become acquainted with
you all? Oh yeah, he had us over. He had me over to his
office. And I think he was kind of leery of old Dr.
Lindsey. And Doc had already told him, Calhoun
told me he says, well here's my territory and over
there's yours. Don't you get in here. Don't you
come across this. But he did ask me one time. He had
me in his office talking. I think I irritated him
because he said to me, he said Calhoun. That's
Calhoun. He wanted to know any disincentives or
negative things about Lindsey. I said, well even
if I had some I wouldn't tell you. So that ended that
discussion. I may have hurt his feelings but I was
pretty loyal to him. Old Doc did the best he could
with what he had and he didn't have much to work
with. Now the enrollment I'm assuming in
engineering in the 50's was going up. Well no,
actually what happened was the enrollment of
everybody went down to about 1955 which was a low
point. It was after the war was over and this was
about in there somewhere maybe even after that
they decided that they wanted to make it optional
corps a little bit. And I think we went on that
program for a little while and enrollment started
going up. Then we went back to compulsory corps and
it started going down again. So the enrollment
never you could just do everything you wanted to
and you couldn't end up with much more than two
sections of about 20 some each. And you all still
had the graduate program. Oh yeah. During those
dry years. And I presume that industry was
generally hiring the bright youngsters when they
graduated Yeah, we had they were we were always
able to place them and we helped place all those
people. The only year that I couldn't get them
placed was I believe in about 1980 when enrollment
had just gone out of proportion and at the same time
the job market dropped completely so we had a real
problem then. Alright. But then Benson was after
Calhoun Calhoun really wasn't Dean very long. He
was up to what? Was he a system? He went up to vice
presidential vice president for engineering I
think. Right. When did you first meet Fred Benson?
Well I met him before he became Dean. I knew him
because we were both in a naval reserve unit
together. And he wasn't very and we actually were
taking one of the math courses there together at
one time. He was taking one course, a lower one than
I was taking. Did he do his degree here? Yeah he got
his B.S. at Kansas and then he got a master's
several years back at here as I recall and then he
was taking some additional courses. Describe
Fred Benson as a human being, as a personality.
Well we got along just fine. One of the things when I
got appointed what he did was call me in one
afternoon and he said Charlie I'd like for you to
take over here as head of the department. I said now
you don't have to tell me right now. You can wait
until a little later and tell me if you think it
over. And so I did and I wasn't really sure I wanted
to. I really wanted to tell him how about getting
old Doc to take it one more year. I'd like to do the
things I'm doing a little longer. But I decided to
go ahead and take it because I thought that I could
probably do more things that I wanted to do if I were
head than I could if they got somebody from the
outside and he started giving me all kinds of
directions. When was that? What year? That was in
1964. At that point you said things you wanted to
do. What were your goals? I'd gone to Exxon in 55 and
gotten started modeling doing distillation on
computers and actually setting up programs to
solve problems on them. And I worked with them,
consulted with them and I had graduate students.
We'd try out new methods and we had an old 650 and
that's what they had at Exxon. And we had an old 650
and they put it up in the old EE building. Now this is
an old key punch? Yeah, in the building. And my
graduate students would go up there and use it at
night and it had a fire escape so they'd go up to the
fire escape and run that thing all night long.
That's what we did. That's the way we got our time.
And we had a lot of that going on. I'd written a book
and a good many papers on it. Methods that we had
devised to solve these problems. So this was, at
this point primarily petro-chemically related.
Yeah. Or you can do chemical either one. It was,
it's used in both fields. Not just one. But back to
Benson. Describe him. What did he like and not
like? How did he operate? Well, he I think although
he would claim that he wanted everybody to say what
they wanted to he really wanted to hear the right
words. And he had around him people that he knew
would always back him up. I remember I used to go in
there to budget hearings. And he'd have Ed Fenner.
Then he'd have Old Bain, Spencer and he'd have two
or three others like that. And he'd say something
and they'd all chime in. But he and I got along
pretty well because I never did I never did go in and
ask him any questions for me. I went ahead and
solved the things. The only time he and I got
crosswise was he was pushing real hard for this
Doctor of Engineering program. And he had all of us
department heads in there one day. And what he was
wanting us to do was agree not to weaken down the
B.S. degree to where it would not be an accredited
degree and have the Doctor of Engineering be the
first accredited degree. And I stood up against
him because I told him that we could not afford to
have a large group of students coming out of here
without an accredited degree. If we were going to
give a B.S. degree we'd better make it accredited.
And he got so mad at me that he walked out and stayed
gone for about 15 minutes. And then we finally
decided we'd have it kind of optional. We'd always
have the B.S. accredited. But if they wanted to go
at an early stage somewhere over to the Doctor of
Engineering they could. And so we'd just leave it
where whichever one won out would be the way we'd
go. And I told them we were just not big enough to
fight against the whole United States on one
program like that. They'd run us out of business.
So he and I and then later he says Charlie you can do
whatever you want to. But he told me many times that
I had the best department in college engineering.
How long in years was that Doctor of Engineering
degree planned to be? Oh it was slightly longer I
think than a Masters. And it was made up of course
work plus a problem in industry. It was actually a
real good degree. It might fit engineering better
than some of the real because when you get over too
far in the research you're nearly like a chemist or
a physicist. And you could make a good program out
of that where you would actually do research on
things that pertain to engineering per se more
than you can on some of the directions they're
going in because they get toward the science end of
it and then you're dealing with the physicist or
the chemist and so on. So it was a good degree. It was
just that I didn't think that we could swing it.
What did happen to it? Well there's still I think
they still give some of them but it just wasn't the
demand for it. It's just hard to sell. So there was a
key decision that I had something to do. I saved him
there really. In Benson's personality did he
laugh much? No he was always just in the meetings
there was never much said. He got to the point
pretty quickly didn't he? Oh yeah. And it was well
thought out. Anything he did was well thought out.
He was good to work for. I didn't have a bit of
trouble working for him. We just had I mean he knew
that I wasn't back down anymore. I'd express my
opinion. He didn't like it but he respected it and
then he told me later I think he really it hurt him
that he couldn't handle it better than he did. In
your early years as department head who were your
key associates as department heads elsewhere in
engineering and anywhere else? Oh well actually
in those years I knew all the department heads real
well. But who were the ones you worked with most?
Well I knew Semang real well. He and I were well
acquainted. Describe him. Well he was very
precise and very fair and I had a lot of respect for
him and he did for me. Describe him physically.